# HTML-to-PDF-UA

Java App to generate PDF/UA and PDF/A-3A compliant PDFs from HTML using the [OpenHTMLtoPDF](https://github.com/danfickle/openhtmltopdf) library.

PDF/UA is a set of requirements for universally-accessible PDF documents. You can refer to the document [PDF/UA in a Nutshell](https://github.com/jialiang/HTML-to-PDF-UA/blob/master/PDFUA-in-a-Nutshell-PDFUA.pdf) published by the PDF association to learn more about PDF/UA.

## Example

In the [Example folder](https://github.com/jialiang/HTML-to-PDF-UA/tree/master/example), you can see an example input HTML and output PDF as well as the accessibility report generated by [PDF Accessibility Check 3](https://www.access-for-all.ch/en/pdf-accessibility-checker.html).

## Download

You can download the compiled Java app from the [Releases page](https://github.com/jialiang/HTML-to-PDF-UA/releases/).

## Usage

- Make sure you have Java installed.
- In the same folder as the HTML file you want to convert, create a folder called "fonts". This folder must contain all the fonts used by the HTML in TrueType _(.ttf)_ format _(even the ones installed locally on your PC needs to be included)_. It uses heuristics based on filename to determine the font weight _(e.g. thin, extra-light, light, regular, medium, semi-bold, bold, extra-bold, black)_ and font style _(e.g. italic)_.
- Make sure to set the page size and margins of the generated PDF by including this style block in your HTML file:

  ```
  @page {
    margin: 0;
    size: a4;
  }
  ```

  See [this example](https://github.com/danfickle/openhtmltopdf/wiki/Page-features) for more options.

- Make sure to define these metadata in the `<head>` of your HTML file:

  ```
    <meta name="subject" content="the subject" />
    <meta name="author" content="the author" />
    <meta name="description" content="the description" />
  ```

- Remember to define the bookmarks in the `<head>` of your HTML file. It functions as a table of contents for your PDF.

  ```
  <bookmarks>
    <bookmark name="Section 1" href="#section-1" />
    <bookmark name="Section 2" href="#section-2" />
    <bookmark name="Section 3" href="#section-3" />
  </bookmarks>
  ```

- Remember to include the `lang` and `dir` attribute in your `<html>` tag:

  ```
  <html lang="en" dir="ltr">
  ```

- Ensure that all links contain a `title` attribute to describe the link.
- Run `java -jar html-to-pdf-ua.jar "path/to/your/html/file"` on your console.
- A file called `output.pdf` will be generated in the same folder as your HTML file.

## Compilation

- Make sure you have a Java Development Kit _(1.8 and above)_ and Apache Maven installed.
- Run `mvn clean package`

## Warning

Don't expect to plug in any random HTML file and receive a nice PDF.

OpenHTMLtoPDF uses it's own engine to render the HTML file. So expect e-mail client level feature support _(e.g. flexbox and calc are not supported)_ and plenty of inconsistencies with mainstream browsers.

Chances are, you'll need to rebuild your HTML to accommodate it.

As unfortunate as the situation is, I've yet to find anything free that's better than OpenHTMLtoPDF for creating PDF/UA compliant PDFs from HTML.

## Advice

- Avoid `display: inline-block` whenever possible.
- Whitespaces are considered sensitive.
- Changing the CSS display value for `li` elements causes errors.
- Using the CSS property `column-count` causes errors.
- Using `position: absolute` or `float` messes up the reading order.
- The best way to position content is by using margins _(negative or positive)_.
- Use the [PDF Accessibility Check](https://www.access-for-all.ch/en/pdf-accessibility-checker.html) to check your PDF for PDF/UA compliance. Besides passing the automatic tests, don't forget to use the "Screen Reader Preview" function to ensure that the structure and order of your PDF makes sense.
